Adding docs for native mint/burn gas token (#2995)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/launch-arbitrum-chain/02-configure-your-chain/common-configurations/enable-mint-burn-for-gas-token.mdx

---

> title: 'Enable native mint/burn for Arbitrum chain gas token'

Reviewer: I think this page should lists some of the risks of using native interop tokens. Wdyt @leeederek

sidebar_label: 'Enable native mint/burn for Arbitrum chain gas token'
description: 'Learn how to enable native mint/burn for your Arbitrum chain gas token'
user_story: 'As a developer or researcher of the Arbitrum product suite, I want to learn about native mint/burn feature for bridging of gas tokens'
content_type: release announcement
---

:::info

> While Native Mint/Burn was introduced in ArbOS 41, we strongly recommend that teams upgrade to ArbOS 51 Dia to enable this feature.

Reviewer: Link ArbOS 51 release doc

| **ArbOS/Nitro (consensus-v51)**                     | Offchain Labs                                      | • Precompile `ArbNativeTokenManager`<br/>• Owner allowlist and 7-day timelock<br/>• Node rule that blocks value-bearing withdrawals while an owner is present                                        |
| **Adapter contract**                                | Bridge infra provider (LayerZero, Hyperlane, etc.) | • Verifies cross-chain messages<br/>• Calls `mintNativeToken` / `burnNativeToken` on L2<br/>• Manages collateral vault on L1                                                                         |
| **Chain Configuration and Adjacent Infrastructure** | RaaSes                                             | • Permission the adapter address with mint & burn<br/>• Run the outbox-sweep bot (this could also be run by LayerZero)<br/>• Monitor timelock and supply events (could also be responsibility of LZ) |

## Use cases

> - LayerZero OFTs as gas tokens.

Reviewer: To be inline with xERC-20 wording

- xERC-20 token as a gas token.
- Stablecoins (e.g. USDC) use mint/burn functionality for cross-chain interop.

_Notes:_

- We **do not** recommend enabling Native Mint/Burn if your chain relies on the canonical bridge for liquidity or if you cannot comfortably implement the operational safeguards listed below.
- This feature is **bridge-agnostic**, so it’s possible to migrate from a bridge adapter implementation (e.g., LayerZero-OFT adapter) to another adapter without forking the chain or changing the gas token.

> - **Infra-level** benefit: unifies liquidity so Orbit users see only one native gas token and avoid the previous “two bridge pools” condition (LayerZero integration still uses a lockbox/representation model, thus it does not remove wrapping globally).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Infra-level** benefit: unifies liquidity so Arbitrum Stack chain users see only one native gas token and avoid the previous “two bridge pools” condition (LayerZero integration still uses a lockbox/representation model, thus it does not remove wrapping globally).
```

2. Only addresses in the native-token owners list may call these methods. Chain owners manage that list through [`ArbOwner`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/main/ArbOwner.sol):
   - [`addNativeTokenOwner(address)`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/f49a4889b486fd804a7901203f5f663cfd1581c8/ArbOwner.sol#L44-L46)
   - [`removeNativeTokenOwner(address)`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/blob/f49a4889b486fd804a7901203f5f663cfd1581c8/ArbOwner.sol#L50-L52)

<ImageZoom
  src="/img/bridge-provider-mint-burn-diagram.png"
  alt="Bridge provider mint and burn"
  caption="A 3rd-party messaging layer triggers its Adapter to unlock to a specific address. The Adapter mints new tokens and distributes them to the user."
  className="img-600px"
/>

### Collateralization Technique

**Guarantee Collateralization of the Native Mint/Burn Contract**

The main risk of having two contracts responsible for native token issuance (the 3rd-party contract and the chain’s bridge) is collateralization imbalances. For example, you could end up with:

- 90% of tokens in the 3rd-party contract

> - 10% of tokens in the Orbit chain bridge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 10% of tokens in the Arbitrum Stack chain bridge
```

In which case, either could be under-collateralized for a withdrawal at any given time.

To resolve this problem, we can implement:

1. **Collateral Sweep:** Allow the parent-chain bridge contract to ‘sweep’ native gas tokens to a designated 3rd-party contract. Presumably, this is the contract that holds collateral for the chain (e.g., in LayerZero’s case, the parent chain Adapter contract).

> 2. **Disable Orbit Bridge Withdrawals:** Disabling withdrawals on the Orbit chain, which ensures the 3rd-party token contract is the primary way to exit the chain (prevents an under-collateralized withdrawal on the bridge).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Disable Arbitrum Chain Bridge Withdrawals:** Disabling withdrawals on the Arbitrum Stack chain, which ensures the 3rd-party token contract is the primary way to exit the chain (prevents an under-collateralized withdrawal on the bridge).
```

The **Collateral Sweep** is implemented by adding an Outbox contract to the bridge that can permissionlessly send **only** native gas tokens locked on the parent chain bridge to a 3rd-party contract. This keeps all collateral in one place when mint/burn is enabled.

- [Outbox contracts](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/pull/339) are authorized to spend funds from the bridge. They can be registered using the admin function `setOutbox`.

>   Typically, an Outbox contract requires verification of a proof for an authorized withdrawal to occur. We can design one that permissionlessly sends native gas to a destination on the parent chain.

Reviewer: "We can design one that permissionlessly sends native gas to a destination on the parent chain." Who is we? This sounds like it came from notion doc

**Disabling Withdrawals** is achievable by adapting the Nitro node to prevent non-zero value withdrawals. This approach still maintains our censorship-resistant properties, allowing the user to initiate a withdrawal from L1.

1. Value-bearing withdrawals via the canonical bridge are automatically rejected as long as at least one native-token owner exists, ensuring that all exits occur through the external adapter.
2. A helper contract, [**`ERC20MigrationOutbox`**](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/main/src/bridge/extra/ERC20MigrationOutbox.sol), can sweep any “dust” that lands in the bridge and transfer it to the external adapter on L1.

## Recommended configuration

### Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure that the chain has:

| Item             | Minimum version                                                                                                                         |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | nitro-contracts  | [v3.1.1](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/releases/tag/v3.1.1) (include the ERC20MigrationOutbox)                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| nitro-contracts  | [v3.1.1](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/releases/tag/v3.1.1) or higher (includes the ERC20MigrationOutbox)                        |
```

> | nitro-node       | [v3.9.3](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/releases/tag/v3.9.3) (includes the fix for `ArbNativeTokenManager` precompile inclusion) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| nitro-node       | [v3.9.3](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/releases/tag/v3.9.3) or higher (includes the fix for `ArbNativeTokenManager` precompile inclusion) |
```

   :::important
   The feature becomes live once the chain timestamp passes `NativeTokenManagementFromTime`. Until then, the `add/removeNativeTokenOwner` call will revert.
   :::
3. Deploy your bridge adapter (e.g., LayerZero OFT) and note the contract address.
4. Add the deployed bridge adapter as a native-token owner:
   ```bash
   cast send 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000070 \
     "addNativeTokenOwner(address)" \
     {0xTheNewOwnerToBeAdded} \
     --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY \
     --rpc-url $RPC_URL
   ```
5. _(Optional)_ Deploy `ERC20MigrationOutbox` on L1 and run a bot to call `sweep()` on a desired cadence.
6. Chain owners should monitor the following events:
   - `OwnerActs(0xaeb3a464, address indexed owner, bytes data)` to see adding native owner
   - `OwnerActs(0x96a3751d, address indexed owner, bytes data)` to see removing native owner
   - `NativeTokenMinted` and `NativeTokenBurned` to see token mint and burn events

### Temporarily disabling the Mint/Burn feature

> There may be situations where you want to disable the feature temporarily, i.e., to investigate a bridge bug or supply imbalance. All calls below are made from an [**ArbOwner**](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/) wallet. These commands are for RaaS / chain teams, bridge teams have their own operating procedures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There may be situations where you want to disable the feature temporarily, e.g., to investigate a bridge bug or supply imbalance. All calls below are made from an [**ArbOwner**](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-precompile-interfaces/) wallet. These commands are for RaaS / chain teams, bridge teams have their own operating procedures.
```

## FAQs

### Who should read this page?

- Bridge/infra engineers building an adapter that mints native gas.
- RaaS operators who need to whitelist such an adapter and run the sweeper bot.

### Can I run the feature on an older ArbOS version?

While Native Mint/Burn was technically introduced in ArbOS 41, we strongly recommend upgrading to ArbOS 51 Dia for those enabling this feature.

### What happens to value-bearing withdrawals once I disable the feature?

When the last native-token owner is removed, Nitro automatically re-opens canonical-bridge withdrawals. No additional action is needed.

### How can developers get the timestamp value of `NativeTokenManagementFromTime`?

Filter event `OwnerActs(bytes4 indexed method, address indexed owner, bytes data)` with first index `0xbdb8f707` to get all results, and decode the latest result's data field to get the last valid timestamp. That timestamp would be the point after which `ArbOwner`'s can take action to `nativeTokenOwner` list.

### Are there any live chains currently using this feature?

> Yes. Ethereal, a high-performance perp DEX appchain, is a notable live implementation. They utilize the native mint/burn functionality in partnership with LayerZero to provide seamless bridging for their native gas token.

Reviewer: Link Ethereal?

<br />

> :::caution[Testing Responsibility] While Offchain Labs has conducted comprehensive [system tests](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/master/system_tests/arbos_upgrade_test.go#L292)

Reviewer: This notice is missing close (doesn't display correctly)
